
=head1 Cellular Programming (CP)


=head2 Preamble

This document describes a set of workflows, which evolved from and
for the development of the Kephra editor.
Please stick to these guidelines if, you want to join the Kephra dev team.
In any other case - take from it and adapt what seems to be useful.


=head2 Core Idea

The name is derived from the behaviour of a biological cell,
that encapsulates the complexity of one task and communicates with
other cells over a simplified protocol (API).
Objects as in object orientation implement the same concept in
software engineering. But here its about organisational subunits,
parts of a software project, with some independence.


Cells have a narrow goal and a reduced set of moving parts. That makes it
easier to reflected upon, plan and complete them - and a completed task
just feels good. The freed up attention can alse be used for creativity
and care for details.

Cells also may depend on the completion of some other cells. This way
it becomes obvious which tasks need to be done next. Progress can be
tracked and specified.
The projects directory tree reflects the cell structure.

Cells demand to put informations into certain files at certain places.
This makes informations easier to find and basic project automation
low effort and done with simple in house (perl) tools.

Cells isolate mistakes. This allows risk free experiments, because
no change in one cell can break something in another.
cells decouple parts of the software development that can be decouped
and allow safe(r) parallelism.

In general CP aims at the golden mean between the big three conflicting
forces in software development: 1. planning, 2.iteration and 3.spontaneity.


=head2 Cell Types

There are 6 kinds (types) of cells. Depending on the project size and
structure, you can leave out some. Essential are only stage and goal,
but in Kephra we use all 6: function, module, feature, stage, goal and sketch.
The next chapter will describe their layout, but here are written
their purpose and usage - sorted by the level of abstraction of its content:
from the lowest, most concrete upwards.



=head3 Function

The purpose of a functional prototype cell is practical research.
If your planned software has to fetch data from a file format that you're
not familiar with - you have to find out how to do it.
Reading documentation is a good first step, but you're not proficient in
that task, until you've programmed it. Beside - documentation might lie.
You want to know the pro's and con's, the pitfalls and the benefits of a
technology or programming technique for sure.

That is best found out in a minimal sized program that serves as a show case.
This prototype answers the question if a library does work on your computer
or environment and it can be analyzed for memory and CPU usage. You will
get clean numbers that are not muddied by other code that would be part
of the main program or a bigger library. Also the actual dependencies
will be then clear. This is invaluable information for proper planning
and can be reused for (copied or referenced into) other projects.

A functional proto is a little sub-project with its own documentation,
main program, libraries and tests. And once its running and feature complete,
it has to be cleaned up, formatted, commented and well structered
like it is the main program. That way you can always come back and use the
code as documentation on how to use this API, low level syntax or other
feature - demo'ed by this prototype. You could also clone (copy and rename)
this function cell to work on a related issue.

Functional prototypes free the developers mind since
ease up the development in

In short it's an ensurance, that the API you build on top can do what it
promises. And it also secures that you know how to implement base level
tasks your project relies upon. That alone avoids one source of unforeseen
project delays, since you

as intended and the functionality is encapsuled as you intend it to use it later



=head3 Module

Module cells are the location where libraries, which are the backbone
of the project, get developed. This task becomes easier, when important
decisions are made elsewhere - be it of design (goal), management (stage)
or technical (function) nature. In other words: we implemented
(put flesh on) already designed interfaces without solving hard
technical problems, which is done during previous, functional cells.

All the documentation and the tests of a module cell serve only its content:
a group of libraries, which together solve one larger task or are of the same topic.
Together they are a subunit of the program. Treating these subunits as
separate projects, builds pressure to simplify the overall structure
(architecture) of the program and to clearify the interfaces between modules.
It also allows to have different swappable alternatives for one module,
or to produce failing experiments, which don't affect the rest of the project.

It is advised to have a planned order in which to write the modules.
This furthermore pushes for a clean architecture with a clear hierarchy
of reliance, since a module is only allowed to use/import already
completed modules.

If you have to extend a module to support the next major release -
which (of course) has an expanded feature set and therefore needs more
module methods - please start a new cell, by copying from another module.
That source cell is assigned to an older release and will thus recieve
only bug fixes. It can be automated, that these fixes will be forwarded
to offshoot cells.


=head3 Feature

Feature prototype cells are the test bed for the development of the
high level API - the face your program shows to the user. Hence they are
just a specialized case of module cell and much of the above applies.
They are different because there is more communication and work that goes
into artwork as well as GUI and CLI development and testing. Feature
prototypes also tend to have more dependencies than module prototypes.

One advantage to do these task in an prototype environment is that
(if time allows) one can pursue an ideal and cut back later. This is less
effort than one might expect if the tools and partial solutions are in
place anyway and good tools (editors) support such tasks.

=head3 Stage

Stage cells are the dockyards where major releases get to be planned and
assembled. Their name refers to "stages of development" or toward the goal.

At first you note what subset of the general plan becomes the next release.
Usually we try to balance an advantageous effort/features delivered ratio
with an practical assessment which features are best developed together.
After that analysis a plan gets written down which function, modul and
feature cells do the bulk of the work in that stage.

Inside a stage cell is hardly any coding done, only rudimental smoke tests,
since even most of the integration testing is done in previous cells.
It is rather user level documentation and the rest of the packaging,
what is created here.


=head3 Goal

Because any sane software project has only one goal, there also should be
only one goal cell that contains the general plan. (This is an exception
to the previously established rule of getting things done and move on
with the next cell.) You iterate here whenever needed.

The goal is first formulated as user level documentation in normal
text files as POD, markdown or ASCIIdoc. This puts the least amount of
restrictions on the author to put out forming ideas. Unlike in a sketch,
this IS the actual documentation of the project, so it has to be precise
and quality, as much as you can muster.

As a next stage you write also as dummy code with empty classes,
empty modules  and sometimes even empty methods with signatures, variables
and comments. This is much more natural and readable that UML diagramms
and gives you a general sense what belongs where.
And it uses the compiler/interpreter as a first test if this structure
actually can work.

But the most important reason for that exercise is finding good
names for the classes, methods and modules. This becomes way easier
in front of the real structure. Here you can see what fits and where are
conflicts to resolve. And its important to get those names right as early
as possible. On the one hand you will need less refactorings and a more
uniform/ understandable code base. But also, while finding the proper
names you can derive from them a glossary of terms with a project specific
meaning. They should then used consistantly in documentation, tests, code
identifiers (class method variable names) and even comments.
That makes the code more understandable and the documentation more helpful,
since the actual code will be just a continuation of the documentation
speaking the same language.

In order to get stability and to minize changes, we plan (classes) as far
into the future as possible and reach for an ideal, which gets cut back
in some places anyway. Cutting back is always easier and less troublesome,
than attaching what does not really fit.

The current stage will pick only a subset of the goal, but is obliged
to be consistent with the goal (checkable by software tests).
Because the goal is of course subject to changes - older stages might
become out of sync, but there are either in maintenance mode anyway or
just a source of knowledge.

The goal cell also contains the project wide style guide and other
dev level documentation, that speaks to your team members and not the user.
It explains the architecture and the components, the interfaces,
the how and the why.


=head3 Sketch

Sketch cells are a landing pads for sets of related ideas,
where the author can put them down, reflect, order, filter and rewrite them,
until they might become something useful or not. For that process are
simple markup languages like  markdown, POD or org mode highly recommended,
but plain text will do also.

Sketch cells lend themself for prototyping goal documentation
and are the only place in CP without any strict rules,
because you need a valve for raw creativity.


=head2 Directory and File Structure

Every perl project is in a directory that contains subdirectories like
like /lib, /bin, /t and maybe /doc, /xt and so forth.
CP adds just /dev to it, where all the development will take place.
The above mentioned subdirectories will only contain the current release,
which is a copy from /dev/stage/current_stage_name.

/dev itself will have 4 subfolder, for the cell types:
    - /function
    - /goal
    - /sketch
    - /stage

module and feature cells belong to a certain stage where they sit under
    - /dev/stage/name/module/name
    - /dev/stage/name/feature/name.

Since function cells are plenty are should be sorted by topic since over 20
subdirectories is too much for orientation

They will have their own /doc, /lib, /bin ...
directories if needed. But the stages, which are storted under
/dev/stage/stagename have their modular and feature cells in subfolder,
because they got developed only for that stage.
Functional protos are under: /dev/function/topic/cell_name.

Every root directory of a cell has a status.cp.txt which reports the
progress and inner dependencies of cell.
The root of every cell type except goal contains a index.cp.txt listing
the viable cells and their status.

A lot of what is usually hidden in branches, will in CP have its place
in the dir structure. This way it is search- and findable.

Under /dev/tool lies software to monitor state (which stages are there, which
are completed and so forth) and integrity of the project (do the module cells of
the current stage match the module structure in /dev/goal/lib) as well as a
global test runner.

=head2 Basic Workflow

This describes the way from project start to the first major release.
For every next release the cycle (partially) repeats.


    1) collect ideas: features, user stories, architectural parts, GUI
       and sort them by topic, component and importance in sketch cells.
       Note which candidates for language, libraries and technologies you
       want to take into consideration.

    2) derive dev documentation from collected ideas, describing features
       and rough architecture under /dev/goal/doc

    3) write the dummy code under /dev/goal/lib. Start with initializing
       the big components and refine them one by one is several waves.

    4) partition the envisioned features into several releases and not that
       in the dev/stage/index.cp.txt

    5) plan inside dev/stage/name/status.cp.txt which function, module and
       feature cell will be needed

    6) implement the function cells

    7) implement the module cells

    8) implement the feature cells

    9) assemple all at /dev/stage/name

    10) package, test and ship the release


=head2 Workflow in Detail


=head3 1: Collect Ideas



 The only requirements are:

    1. they have to sorted by topic and maturity.

    2. abandoned sketches are moved in a special sektion and

    3. when a sketch page or its content becomes part of another cell,
       it has to be deleted here.


=head3 2: Developer Documentation

       This process helps to get feel for the code structure and what belongs where.
       It assist greatly in finding fitting abstractions and self explanatory
       class and method names - which improves initial code quality greatly and
       reduces the need for refactoring.

       Unlike boring fantasy UML diagrams, this dummy code can be checked
       automatically, if in sync with the published code base.

=head3 3: Dummy Code

Dummy code has numerous advantages over UML and other abstract specs:

    1. It forces you to think about the implementation from early on,
       not to construct sky castles.

    2. It uses the same format as the actual implementation, no translation needed.

    3. Our compiler or interpreter will ensure consistancy.

    4. Comments are easy to attach. They explain what supposed to happen where
       and often grow later into better, more detailled ideas.

    5. Instead of describing what a class will do, write some dummy methods.
       That is more productive and at least as descriptive, if the class,
       method and attribute names are well chosen.
    6. Fitting and precisely speaking names are the soul of clean code.
       They go hand in glove with the abstractions they represent and should
       designed together. And starting as early with the search for names,
       gives us more time to find the ones we don't have to change later,
       when refactoring becomes a taxing work.

=head3 4: Select Next Features

=head3 5: Plan Stage

=head3 6: Function Cell

=head3 7: Module Cell

=head3 8: Feature Cell

=head3 9: Assemble Stage

=head3 10: Packaging


=head3 Fundamental Ideas

    0) adress one set of problems at a time


    1) We look for a careful balance between
       form (realistic planning and commensurability of progress) and
       flow (flexibility and creative joy) which allows much of both.
       In fact they are interdependent
       because dabbling in an unstructured environment or even a mess is no fun
       and people without fun are not very productive.

    2) One ingredient to achieve that is to obey and not and not sabotage
       the natural order and and logic behind the progression of a flittering idea
       to a solid well rounded product.
       Important part of the planning is to know who needs when which information.

    3) There are 5 views we have to care about simultaneously:
       a) the libs/API we use/ program against
       b) the API our libs provide
       c) features from the users perspective
       d) fully usable and deployable stages through which our program evolves
       e) the overall architecture and documentation of the program/project
       This list has an inherent bottom up order, can be also found in our planning/roadmap.
       To have this full 360 view is one reason why its clled complete programming.

    4) Once the issues are sorted into these 5 boxes, they can be than even
       easier decoupled into smaller pieces, that are easier to prioritize,
       rearrange and to solve. Work becomes more fun, less of a burden,
       because you only have to care about one of these 5 levels at once.

    5) Each "cell" in one of these "boxes" is a fully functional,
       testable and tested unit.
       This makes it not only more manageable and measurable (and it can be
       parallelized more often), but it's also much more fun for two reasons.
       First: you can try out a lot without being able to brake something.
       Secondly: each little work provides an immediate productive benefit
       to the project, even writing documentation.

    6) Actually we consider documentation so important,
       that we start to write it even before coding anything.

    7) Writing Tests (except unit tests) is the last thing we do,
       to close a parcel so to speak.

    8) All aspects of a feature (docs, code, comments, tests, artwork) are
       developed together and by same (group of) people.
       This is another meaning of "complete".

    9) The repository (codebase) is the primary means of communication.
       Decentral VCS like hg or git play a vital role in CP.


=head3 Observations

    1) The awesome powers of prototypes are known but still not systematically used.

    2) Software tests are no silver bullet. They are used for several competing
       purposes and are often not even realistically doable.
       That's why a lot of programers hate seriously don't like it.

    3) New tools like hg or git allow new workflows which solve pending problems.


=head3 Completeness

 Lets start with a small meditation, because Complete Programming (CP) relies on
embodying a mindset that is still a bit alien to some. In one word it is holistic -
meaning seeing the full (complete) picture. That includes the views of the user,
the programmer, the designer, tester and project manager.
That sounds demanding, but you do it already when you really care about something.

 As a consequence we count an ugly icon, missing documentation or an badly
designed internal API equally as a bug as a crashing function. CP is designed
to deliver that high standard, without packing too much burden on the programmer.
 Firstly: all aspects of a feature are planned at once - so they're in tune with
each other. And they are also get imlepemented together - when details are fresh
in your memory. And since that also includes comments and documentation, you will
later know what you have done and why, saving a lot of guesswork.
 Secondly: we reduce duplicate work and duplicate data where possible. CP will
compel you to think about a problem several times, to ensure you understood its
implications. But every time you will produce a useful part of the project.
Every vital information goes into one well structured repository (again holistic!).
Your highten clarity and the low duplication also improve the quality of the
communication, that will mainly take place through your common work (repository).
 And thirdly: as hinted, the development model knows several decoupled, well
defined stages that correlate with the natural flow of ideas into materialisation.
Any stage has only one goal that is set according to its possibilities and with
respect to its unavoidable limits. That's one reason why work gets less heavy.
(Joyful labour is important to get the deeper focus we need to achieve quality.)
The other reason: some stages allow free minded hacking and bring back the fun
you missed for so long. (Play and work balanced - that is holistic too).

The next chapter describe each stage in detail.


=head3 Planning

Initial planning in CP is mostly metaplanning. Of course you have to think about
the classic five questions:

   * general vision of the program with use cases
   * approx. feature list
   * small roadmap (what feature into what stage)
   * on which technology to rely (with fallback alternatives)
   * what team we need (especially in a corporate setting)

Take your time and write down answers in a structured and well readable manner,
because this gets already shipped into the repository as user docs. In a sense -
development has already started. Of course these docs will be presented to your
boss as the project proposal - better they are convincing and well formulated.

Please don't overdo your first plan, since most information you will gather along
the way.  CP means that new information will get stored quickly in the appropriate
places - not that work targets change every week. CP knows well defined workflows
which spare the team from some agreements people call planning. Some planning will
be replaced by asynchronous interactions with results that are immediately visible
to all project member. But still there are meetings, a boss and something similar
as sprints.

=head4 Metaplanning

After the rough goal is set and before any "real" coding begins - its time for
the announced metaplanning. Outline the abstraction layers of the program and
plan when to introduce them during developement. This is most critical, because
changes on these cause the most growth pain. Write some placesholder now into the
code base for all eyes to see and all devs to remember. The compiler will tell
you, if it's coherent.  It also helps you to find the right names for important
details, so later they will be used consistantly in the docs, code and all the rest.

Second part of metaplanning is: Adapt this document, which is part of the programers
documentation, to the needs of the project. Maybe your team is smaller and several
roles will be played by one person or maybe your program has no GUI and you have
to redefine completeness of a feature. Maybe you want to tweak the role of tests -
by all means these are not the ten commandments.
And please give us a feedback when your tweaks seem to work well.

=head4 Roadmap

After the metaplanning do a small roadmap. In CP thats basically a list of several
planned stages of growth. Assign the features you already know about to a stage,
where it can be developed with least effort and all needed abstractions and support
libs exist. Try to group related features in one stage - so changes become more
managable. If your understanding is clear enough - assign the features to
substages that will be handled similar to a sprint.

Savor the magic of a new beginning and avoid the trap of doing things as usual.


=head3 Documentation

As you saw, CP starts always by writing documentation, forwhy its usually better
to think before doing anything. Putting it down also helps to reflect on it.
And knowing that others will rely on it, should motivate you toward precision.

The first thoughts about anything are too vague to build a good program from.
Trial and error and even more thinking have to follow, before it gets useful.
So why not take what you get in the first minutes, put it in a  readable form,
(which helps you to understand it deeper) and minimize with the result the effort
to write the docs after you did coding. Practically that is one trick in CP to
do more and better quality with less work. As your clairvoyance is most probably
not fully developed, you need to readjust the doc safter implementation.
Read details about that in chapter L<Main Program> and L<Itersations>.

Some devs feel writing docs is unproductive, a waste of time or should be done
by people more talented to do that. Even if good UI design is "self-explanatory",
missing docs are crippling the usability and not findable features are not
distinguishable from not existing ones. Thatswhy only documented features, libs
and API's are quality work. And since you wrote them, you should document them.
It would take more time to explain it anyway, especially to a none-techie. And
switching to the users perspective - that's what you need to do for writing good
docs - you also need to develope good software.

The reason why docs are considered in the "agile" field as less important,
(agile manifesto says: "Working software over comprehensive documentation")
is because they confuse it with overhead. In CP we only document software parts as
a first step toward their implementation. Planned ones are just noted in a roadmap.
Meetings get more productive, when everybody gets all information and there is
arguing about now to be made changes in the docs that will go online instantly.
Managers as well as customers will get high level user docs. They are the basis
of most communication. That's because the struggle for satisfying agreements,
a common language and a good product are the same thing. Unifying them makes just
sense, improves transparency, demands honesty and reduces overhead.

User docs, developer docs and comments, as well as the code itslef are means of
communication between people. They have to cooperate. All these parts should have
a common language and define key words and phrases in the exactly same way.
Less friction here is an enormous productivity boost - a further reason,
why they gotta be written altogether and by the same people.


=head3 Prototypes

One of the things Steve Jobs got right was: "Start with envisioning the user
experience and then work your way through the technicalities.". CP does that by
beginning with a bit of user documentation - followed by an explorative phase,
where developers find out how to realize it by writing prototypes.
These are small, quickly written programs that are test beds for very few things.
Usually do programer enjoy building them, because they demand less restrictions
than huge programs and allow much more fast changes and creativity.
This way ideas get stable without harming the "real code" and coders have more fun.
And if a prototype turns out to be a blind alley, it can be deleted without remorse.

Some may now intervene: "Why not just fork an experimental/feature branch,
if we using hg, git or arch anyway? Afterwards it can be just merged back by the
software and we don't have to write that code again in the main program.".
Well, like said - dealing with a huge program is much more hairy and distracting -
compared with that fresh clean start prototypes provide. And beside that -
the code that will flow back is not as much compared with the
many trials and errors that might pollute the history of the main project branch
if you merge it there. There is still rebase, that cleans it up, but you might
preserve that history in the right place, since there you learned your lessons.

Prototypes also serve an educational purpose. Programmers often look up how they
did something in their own programs. That is much easier with nicely commented,
sorted and indexed prototypes that sit and wait unchanged in their own branch -
presenting just the essence how to solve one particular problem. Its a kind of
documentation from programmer to programmer. But this works only if a solution
is also tidied up after its found. When you later want to test another idea just
clone or copy a similar prototype and you already got the needed minimal framework
supporting that kind of function.

A completed prototype has also a role similar to a test. It demonstrates that a
chunk of code works that way. You can't practically achieve that while have having
a lot dependencies that can introduce a failure into an otherwise working piece
of code. And even besides that - in CP we have a way to write prototypes,
where you can do heart transplant to the production stream without greater trouble.

CP knows two types of prototypes that are living in two seperate branches.
That's because the main program has to bridge two endpoints which are too different
to think about and optimize for at once. Theset are the hardware or the near
hardware software layer and the user. For the one side we have functional
prototypes and for the second use case prototypes.


=head4 Dry Programming

CP doesn't distinguishes between writing documentation or building the program.
User docs are a first step of programming and we write code to document ideas.
That might include comments, that mark and explain what is expected to happen
at that place, before the actual code can be written. But I mean also creating
files, inserting empty classes, methods, attributes - even variables, that have
a name and purpose we already could agree upon.

At first: our thoughts get concrete - fast. If you see your ideas like that,
you get a much better sense how the program will be look like. Spotting design
flaws or misleading names becomes easier - plus the compiler tells, if the plan
is even doable. Don't underestimate the power of names. They are equally important
as the logic, helping to communicate the inner workings and the intentions of the
architect. In CP we spend some time just writing dummy code and contemplate about
it, to find the right hierarchies and names.
Maybe other people don't call that programming, but we certainly do.

Secondly: having this dummy code in place (just do it for the current roadmap stage),
team member will comprehend the current goals and where to put their work into
much clearer than from text desctiptions or boring UML-diagrams. Sources will tell
the current state of planning and also its changes in a not ignoreable manner.
This also means: if the architect changes his mind - (ideally) he has to clean up
the mess, created by his changes - including adjusting the tests.
Of course nobody is allowed to check in code that breaks tests.

=head4 Introducing a feature

When a use case prototype is completed in all details and cleaned up,
the architect has to decide in when and in which form it will be introduced,
to prevent experience rot (L<http://www.uie.com/articles/experience_rot/>).
It will happen during one sprint and via a feature branch that will introduce
all changes in program, libs, docs and tests as one commit. So even if the history
of the branch will be preserved - the merge happens with a rebase. As a first
step the libs with theirs tests will be expanded. After that the caller follow.

If there is an config dialog or config files - all switches for the new function
are there and do work. Make sure you only rely on included libs or modules that
are listed in the installer. Please mention also in the comments, which prototypes
were the basis of this feature.

=head3 Tests

The rise of Extreme Programming (XP) gave also rise to Test Driven Development (TDD),
where you start the implementation by building tests. The rationale behind this:
You have to think about your goal by defining it with a small program. After that
it's easier to write the code and the new failing test motivates you to do so.
And as soon you brake a function or specification, the testing suite will yell
at you and you are spared of a very time consuming bug search 10 month later,
when angry user yell at you, because the program deleted their data but you already
forgot half the details of the program.

Problem with this theory: its so hard to write tests out of the blue, because your
notion of this task might be very vague at first. But even if you have a billiant
idea, there are still a lot of details to be added and altered while you grok
the algorithm, its use cases and its role in the larger scheme fully. And having
to rewrite the code and the tests several times is frustrating. Besides - TDD
is not even doable for GUI and other areas where the supporting structure has to
be built first to even run a test. A startling read about even more prescribed
madness in software testing is Elisabeth Hendricksons paper: "better testing -
worse quality?" at L<http://testobsessed.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/btwq.pdf>
But the other benefits of testing are still as worthwhile as describes by TDD people.

That's why in CP we write the tests hopefully once, after the dust is settled.
Because tests are so precise, writing them down will give us a precious opportunity
to rethink the code one last time from a logical and technical perspective.
All the other issues were already solved and we are now free to give special
attention to the corner cases we may have overlooked so far. Yet another case of
getting better results with less effort in CP. Test are written the last phase
of writing a functional/use case prototype and feature branch.

One point that is still experimental, but worth considering - putting the tests
into the code in the same file as the code it tests. The test suite will then be
just a different "starter" for all this code, but no seperate dir tree of code.
That would be really holistic. Writing tests would be easier, even if good editors
can display several files beside each other and test would functions as an
additional comment, explaining what we we want to achieve here. In fact to the
parser of the main program test will appear as comments. This might be hard to
realize in some languages, but not problem in Perl 6 and even Perl 5 should have
at least one way to do that.


=head3 Releases

See more in L<lib/Kephra/Versioning.pod>


=head3 Glossary

=cut
